---
title: "README.md"
author: "Chris Magner"
date: "Friday, May 22, 2015"
output: html_document
---

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Table of Contents

- [Project Overview](#lnk_Overview)

    - [The Project](#)
    
    - [Project Instructions](#)

- [File Information](#lnk_Files)

    - [Files Included in the UCI HAR Dataset](#lnk_RawFiles)

    - [Files Included with the Course Project](#lnk_RepoFiles)

    - [Files Generated by the Course Project](#lnk_GenFiles)

- [Version Information](#lnk_Versions)

- [Procedures Utilized](#lnk_Procedures)

    - [Background of the UCI HAR Dataset](#lnk_RawDataInfo)

    - [Obtaining the UCI HAR Dataset](#lnk_GetRawData)

    - [Generating the Tidy Data Set](#lnk_MakeTidyData)

- [UCI HAR Dataset License](#lnk_License)

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Project Overview                             <a id="lnk_Overview"></a>

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

### The Project                                 <a id="lnk_Project"></a>

This file documents the procedures used to complete the course project
for the *Getting and Cleaning Data* online Coursera course.
    
The project must be submitted BEFORE 11:30 PM UTC on Sunday (5/24/2015). 

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Project Instructions                        <a id="lnk_Instructions"></a>

The purpose of this project is to demonstrate your ability to collect, work
with, and clean a data set. The goal is to prepare tidy data that can be 
used for later analysis. You will be graded by your peers on a series of 
yes/no questions related to the project. You will be required to submit: 

1. a tidy data set as described below,
  
2. a link to a Github repository with your script for performing the 
        analysis, and 
        
3. a code book that describes the variables, the data, and any 
        transformations or work that you performed to clean up the data 
        called *CodeBook.md*. 

You should also include a *README.md* in the repo with your scripts. This
repo explains how all of the scripts work and how they are connected.

One of the most exciting areas in all of data science right now is wearable
computing - see for example this article . Companies like Fitbit, Nike, and
Jawbone Up are racing to develop the most advanced algorithms to attract 
new users. The data linked to from the course website represent data 
collected from the accelerometers from the Samsung Galaxy S smartphone. A 
full description is available at the site where the data was obtained:

<http://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/datasets/Human+Activity+Recognition+Using+Smartphones>

Here are the data for the project:

<https://d396qusza40orc.cloudfront.net/getdata%2Fprojectfiles%2FUCI%20HAR%20Dataset.zip>

You should create one R script called *run_analysis.R* that does the 
following.

   - Merges the training and the test sets to create one data set. 

   - Extracts only the measurements on the mean and standard deviation for 
       each measurement. 

   - Uses descriptive activity names to name the activities in the data set 

   - Appropriately labels the data set with descriptive variable names.

From the data set in step 4, creates a second, independent tidy data set
with the average of each variable for each activity and each subject.

Good luck!

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

## File Information                             <a id="lnk_Files"></a>

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Files Included in the UCI HAR Dataset       <a id="lnk_RawFiles"></a>

- *README.txt*
    - Information file for the UCI HAR Dataset

- *features_info.txt*
    - Shows information about the variables used on the feature vector.

- *features.txt*
    - List of all features.

- *activity_labels.txt*
    - Links the class labels with their activity name.

- *train/X_train.txt*
    - Training data set.

- *train/y_train.txt*
    - Training data set labels.

- *test/X_test.txt*
    - Test data set.

- *test/y_test.txt*
    - Test data set labels.

- *train/subject_train.txt*     
  *test/subject_test.txt*     
    - Each row identifies the subject who performed the activity for each 
        window sample. Its range is from 1 to 30. One file for the training
        data set and the other is for the test data set.

- *train/Inertial Signals/total_acc_x_train.txt*     
  *train/Inertial Signals/total_acc_y_train.txt*     
  *train/Inertial Signals/total_acc_z_train.txt*     
  *test/Inertial Signals/total_acc_x_test.txt*        
  *test/Inertial Signals/total_acc_y_test.txt*       
  *test/Inertial Signals/total_acc_z_test.txt*      
    - The acceleration signal from the smartphone accelerometer.  Each file
        corresponds to either the X, Y, or Z axis for either the training or 
        testing data set. Units are in standard gravity units 'g'. (i.e. 
        meters per second squared.)  Every row shows a 128 element vector. 

- *train/Inertial Signals/body_acc_x_train.txt*    
  *train/Inertial Signals/body_acc_y_train.txt*    
  *train/Inertial Signals/body_acc_z_train.txt*    
  *test/Inertial Signals/body_acc_x_test.txt*             
  *test/Inertial Signals/body_acc_y_test.txt*            
  *test/Inertial Signals/body_acc_z_test.txt*           
    - The body acceleration signal obtained by subtracting the gravity from the
        total acceleration. Each file corresponds to either the X, Y, or Z axis 
        for either the training or testing data set. Units are in meters per 
        second squared.

- *train/Inertial Signals/body_gyro_x_train.txt*    
  *train/Inertial Signals/body_gyro_y_train.txt*    
  *train/Inertial Signals/body_gyro_z_train.txt*    
  *test/Inertial Signals/body_gyro_x_test.txt*
  *test/Inertial Signals/body_gyro_y_test.txt*
  *test/Inertial Signals/body_gyro_z_test.txt*
    - The angular velocity vector measured by the gyroscope for each window
        sample. Each file corresponds to either the X, Y, or Z axis for either
        the training or testing data set. The units are radians/second.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Files Included with the Course Project      <a id="lnk_RepoFiles"></a>

- *README.md*
    - A Markdown file documenting the files, versions, and procedures used.  
        **You are reading it now!**

- *CodeBook.md*
    - A Markdown file documenting the data formats and details.
    
- *run_analysis.R*
    - An R language source code file which performs the data extraction and 
        tidying.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Files Generated by the Course Project       <a id="lnk_GenFiles"></a>

- *extracted_data.csv*
    - A CSV formatted file containing the amalgamated data extracted from the
        raw UCI HAR Dataset.

- *tidy_data.csv*
    - A CSV formatted file containing just the pertinent project information in
        a tidy format.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Version Information                          <a id="lnk_Versions"></a>

This project was created and validated using the following tool versions.

- R
    - R version 3.1.3 (2015-03-09)     
        Platform: x86_64-w64-mingw32/x64 (64-bit)     
        Running under: Windows 7 x64 (build 7601) Service Pack 1    

- R Packages
    - dplyr:  dplyr_0.4.1
    - tidyr:  tidyr_0.2.0

- RStudio
    - Version 0.98.1103

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Procedures Utilized                          <a id="lnk_Procedures"></a>

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Background of the UCI HAR Dataset           <a id="lnk_RawDataInfo"></a>

The following description of how the UCI HAR Dataset was created is taken from
the *README.txt* file included with that data set...

> The experiments have been carried out with a group of 30 volunteers within an
> age bracket of 19-48 years. Each person performed six activities (WALKING, 
> WALKING_UPSTAIRS, WALKING_DOWNSTAIRS, SITTING, STANDING, LAYING) wearing a 
> smartphone (Samsung Galaxy S II) on the waist. Using its embedded accelerometer 
> and gyroscope, we captured 3-axial linear acceleration and 3-axial angular 
> velocity at a constant rate of 50Hz. The experiments have been video-recorded 
> to label the data manually. The obtained dataset has been randomly partitioned 
> into two sets, where 70% of the volunteers was selected for generating the 
> training data and 30% the test data. 
>
> The sensor signals (accelerometer and gyroscope) were pre-processed by 
> applying noise filters and then sampled in fixed-width sliding windows of 
> 2.56 sec and 50% overlap (128 readings/window). The sensor acceleration 
> signal, which has gravitational and body motion components, was separated 
> using a Butterworth low-pass filter into body acceleration and gravity. The 
> gravitational force is assumed to have only low frequency components, 
> therefore a filter with 0.3 Hz cutoff frequency was used. From each window, a
> vector of features was obtained by calculating variables from the time and 
> frequency domain. See *features_info.txt* for more details.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Obtaining the UCI HAR Dataset               <a id="lnk_GetRawData"></a>

Using a browser which supports HTTPS, manually download the file 
*getdata-projectfiles-UCI HAR Dataset.zip* from the URL

- <https://d396qusza40orc.cloudfront.net/getdata%2Fprojectfiles%2FUCI%20HAR%20Dataset.zip>

Extract the contents of this zip file - the "UCI HAR Dataset" directory
and (all of its contents) - and place that directory in the local directory
containing the *run_analysis.R* file.  That probably corresponds to the 
top-level directory of your local Git repo created for this project.

Once you've extracted the data and placed it where it needs to be, you should
review the *README.txt* file included with the data set.  You can find it in 
the relative directory: 
- *UCI HAR Dataset/README.txt*.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Generating the Tidy Data Set                <a id="lnk_MakeTidyData"></a>

Using RStudio (or the R console)...

- Set your working directory to the your local directory containing the 
    *run_analysis.R* code file and and local copy of the top-level 
    *UCI HAR Dataset* directory you downloaded earlier.  
    
- Add the *run_analysis.R* source code to your environment
    ```{r}
    source('run_analysis.R')
    ```

- Run the analysis function
    ```{r}
    run_analysis()
    ```

- The function should generate the following console output
    ```
    [1] "Reading in feature and activity tables..."
    [1] "Reading in the training data..."
    [1] "Reading in the testing data..."
    [1] "Merging the training and testing data sets..."
    [1] "Extracting relevant data..."
    [1] "Creating the tidy data set..."
    [1] "Saving the extracted and tidy data to files..."
    [1] "Done."    
    ```
    
- When the function is finished execution the following two files will be 
    generated:
    - *extracted_data.csv*
    - *tidy_data.csv*

- Read in the extracted and tidy data files back into your environment use the
    following.
    ```{r}
    tidy_data <- 
        read.csv( "tidy_data.csv", header=TRUE, check.names=FALSE )
    extracted_data <-
         read.csv( "extracted_data.csv", header=TRUE, check.names=FALSE )
    ```
    
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

## UCI HAR Dataset License                      <a id="lnk_License"></a>

The following licensing information was taken from the *README.txt* file 
included with the UCI HAR Dataset...

> Use of this dataset in publications must be acknowledged by referencing the 
> following publication [1] 
> 
> [1] Davide Anguita, Alessandro Ghio, Luca Oneto, Xavier Parra and 
> Jorge L. Reyes-Ortiz. Human Activity Recognition on Smartphones using a 
> Multiclass Hardware-Friendly Support Vector Machine. International Workshop of
> Ambient Assisted Living (IWAAL 2012). Vitoria-Gasteiz, Spain. Dec 2012
>
> This dataset is distributed AS-IS and no responsibility implied or explicit can
> be addressed to the authors or their institutions for its use or misuse. Any 
> commercial use is prohibited.
>
> Jorge L. Reyes-Ortiz, Alessandro Ghio, Luca Oneto, Davide Anguita. November 2012.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
